# Breast-Cancer-Prediction-using-Machine-Learning

Medical advancement in today’s era is not limited to only pharmaceuticals but also applies to disease prediction and prevention. Breast Cancer is known to have taken and continues to take millions of female lives. In light of this situation, researchers have come up with various methods to predict its presence in early stages. In this paper, nine bio-markers are used to establish relationships as well as compare levels for patients and healthy controls. Three predictive models have been set up to get accurate results.

Breast cancer is, as of today, the most common cancer in women and the second-most common cancer overall. In 2019, a total of around 268,600 breast cancer cases were diagnosed in women and approximately 2670 in men. Around 41,760 women and 500 men lost their lives to the disease. 1 in 8 women has the chance of being diagnosed with breast cancer and 1 in 37 dies because of it. Research also proves that cancer incidence and death-rates can also be age-specific. Studies indicate that non-Hispanic white women have the highest incidence of rates-130.8 per 100,000. Non-Hispanic black women have the highest breast cancer death rate-28.4 per 100,000. Most of the time, excessive alcohol consumption and obesity can be determining factors in adults. Consequently, maintaining a healthy weight, exercising regularly, and tracking hormones are some healthy habits. Early detection through mammograms, ultrasound and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) can help greatly in timely treatment. Researchers have now found various ways to detect cancer in its early stages. Several models involving YOLO, CNN and regression have been proposed and tested. The following predictive model considers the dependence of several biomarkers for breast cancer detection. A set of ten biomarkers are selected including age, glucose, BMI and leptin. This data was collected in routine blood analyses of patients at a medical facility in Coimbra. Women with higher body mass index (BMI) are known to have a higher risk of breast cancer. Obesity and high leptin levels are also found to be similarly related. Studying the correlation of the biomarkers would help establish and create a logistic regression based on the data provided. Multiple linear regressions and random forest methods were run to compare the existing model’s results. This generalized logistic dependent (BC) model uses machine learning techniques and a statistical approach.

The experimental results are obtained from the following setup. The dataset contained 116 detailed rows. After all required pre-processing, the main data frame was divided into two- one for controls and the other for patients. A thorough statistical analysis was conducted calculating the median for each bio-marker for both data frames. Scatter plots are marked to represent the relationship between the bio-markers, color red representing the patients and blue for the healthy controls. A heatmap was created to derive the positive or negative linear relationship between the bio-markers in terms of correlation. Gamma fitted leptin mean and variance are compute. to establish the relationship between leptin and the other bio-markers using the formulae mentioned above. The training and test data are divided like 80% and 20%. Python 3.8.6 was used along with several python libraries including pandas, numpy, matplotlib, scikit-learn, seaborn and scipy. Five models- Logistic Regression, Linear Discriminant Analysis, Random Forest Classifier, Decision Tree CLassifier and K-Nearest Neighbours are trained and tested. tHe highest accuracies of 90% and 88.75% are achieved with the Random Forest Classifier and Logistic Regression models respectively.

The multiple experiments conducted prove that the Random Forest Classifier model is most accurate in predicting the presence of breast cancer using the nine bio-markers. Glucose and BMI are strong players in detecting the cancer. Creating more samples would obviously increase accuracy percentage. But, these algorithms can easily be implemented for medical purposes.  
